uuencode: add page (#5857)
tldr-pages/tldr: pages/common/uuencode.md

# uuencode

> Encode binary files into ASCII for transport via mediums that only support simple ASCII encoding.
> More information: <https://manned.org/uuencode>.

- Encode a file and print the result to stdout:

> `uuencode {{path/to/input_file}} {{output_file_name_after_decoding}}`

Reviewer: Why specify a output file name if you print it to stdout?

Author: Yeah, it's confusing.  `output_file_name_after_decoding` is the name of the file that will be created when I decode the file.  Because `uuencode` doesn't just encode the file contents; it also encodes the file permissions (`644` in the example below) and the name.

```console
$ echo hello > myfile

$ cat myfile
hello

$ uuencode myfile decodedfile > encoded

$ ls
encoded  myfile

$ cat encoded
begin 644 decodedfile
&:&5L;&\*
`
end

$ uudecode encoded

$ ls
decodedfile  encoded  myfile

$ cat decodedfile
hello

```

Reviewer: That's really confusing

Author: Yea, I'm not sure if it's the tool itself or just the stupid BSD version, but it's definitely **hard** to use, as least for a beginner.  I had to try a bunch of times before I could even get it working 😝

Reviewer: Sounds like there should be an alternative for it.

Author: Yeah.
- https://github.com/murtyjones/uuencode
- https://github.com/zacbarton/node-uuencode
- https://github.com/bnjf/compre.sh
- https://github.com/cention-sany/uuencode
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uuencoding

- Encode a file and and write the result to a file:

> `uuencode -o {{path/to/output_file}} {{path/to/input_file}} {{output_file_name_after_decoding}}`

Reviewer: If you already specify a output file, why do you have to specify the output file name separately?

Author: `path/to/output_file` is the file that the encoded data should be written to.  `output_file_name_after_decoding` is the name of the file that the decoded data will be written to when the file is decoded.  Makes sense?

Author: You could, and that's probably what the user would do.  But how should I indicate that?

Reviewer: It's fine how you documented it, I was just wondering why the command works that way.

Author: It seems kinda dumb, I agree.

> - Encode a file in Base64 instead of the tradition uuencode encoding and and write the result to a file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Encode a file in Base64 instead of the traditional uuencode encoding and and write the result to a file:
```
With `tratitional uuencode oncoding` you mean ASCII, right?

Author: Both formats are technically ASCII. Here's an example:
```console
$ uuencode pages.zh/common/gpg.md gpgmd
begin 644 gpgmd
M(R!G<&<*"CX@1TY5(%!R:79A8WD@1W5A<F3C@((*/B#HK[?ECX+IF(5@9W!G
M,F#DNH;HIZ,@1TY5(%!R:79A8WD@1W5A<F0@,N.`@@H^(.:;M.6DFN2_H>:!
MK^^\FCQH='1P<SHO+V1O8W,N<F5L96YG+FQI;G5X9F]U;F1A=&EO;BYO<F<O
M96XO;&%T97-T+V=P9RYH=&UL/N.`@@H*+2#DN(WEBJ#EKX;OO(SDNX7EK[E@
M9&]C+G1X=&#HOYOHH8SGK;[ED(WOO(CGE)_FB)!@9&]C+G1X="YA<V-@[[R,
MYJ"\Y;R/Y+BZ($%30TE)(.>@@>6]HN6\C^^\B>^\F@H*8&=P9R`M+6-L96%R
M<VEG;B![>V1O8RYT>'1]?6`*"BT@Y:^Y8&1O8RYT>'1@Z+^;Z*&,YZV^Y9"-
MY;FVY8J@Y:^&[[R(YY2?YHB08&1O8RYT>'0N87-C8.^\C.:@O.6\C^2XNB!!
M4T-)22#GH('EO:+EO(_OO(GOO)H*"F!G<&<@+2UL;V-A;"UU<V5R('M[<V5N
M9&5R7VED?7T@+2UR96-I<&EE;G0@>WMR96-I<&EE;G1?:61]?2`M+6%R;6]R
M("TM<VEG;B`M+65N8W)Y<'0@>WMD;V,N='AT?7U@"@HM(.2XNN:.I>:4MNB`
MA2!A;&EC94!E>&%M<&QE+F-O;2#EBJ#EKX9@9&]C+G1X=&#OO(CGE)_FB)!@
M9&]C+G1X="YG<&=@[[R)[[R:"@I@9W!G("TM96YC<GEP="`M+7)E8VEP:65N
M="![>V%L:6-E0&5X86UP;&4N8V]M?7T@>WMD;V,N='AT?7U@"@HM(.6/JN>4
MJ.6OAN>@@>6*H.6OAF!D;V,N='AT8.^\B.>4G^:(D&!D;V,N='AT+F=P9V#O
MO(GOO)H*"F!G<&<@+2US>6UM971R:6,@>WMD;V,N='AT?7U@"@HM(.BGH^6O
MAF!D;V,N='AT+F=P9V#OO(CHOI/EA[KEB+#FH(?EAX;HOI/EA[KOO(GOO)H*
M"F!G<&<@+2UD96-R>7!T('M[9&]C+G1X="YG<&=]?6`*"BT@Y:^\Y86EY+B`
MY+BJY86LZ9*E[[R:"@I@9W!G("TM:6UP;W)T('M[<'5B;&EC+F=P9WU]8`H*
M+2#EK[SEA[H@86QI8V5`97AA;7!L92YC;VT@YYJ$Y86LZ9*E[[R(Z+Z3Y8>Z
MY8BPYJ"'Y8>&Z+Z3Y8>Z[[R)[[R:"@I@9W!G("TM97AP;W)T("TM87)M;W(@
M>WMA;&EC94!E>&%M<&QE+F-O;7U]8`H*+2#EK[SEA[H@86QI8V5`97AA;7!L
M92YC;VT@YYJ$YZ>!Z9*E[[R(Z+Z3Y8>ZY8BPYJ"'Y8>&Z+Z3Y8>Z[[R)[[R:
M"@I@9W!G("TM97AP;W)T+7-E8W)E="UK97ES("TM87)M;W(@>WMA;&EC94!E
.>&%M<&QE+F-O;7U]8`H`
`
end

$ uuencode -m pages.zh/common/gpg.md gpgmd
begin-base64 644 gpgmd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====

$
```

Reviewer: What actually is `tratitional uuencode encoding`? Is there maybe a better word for it?

Author: Well, we could call it `ugly encoding`.

Author: Just kidding.  It's definitely not pretty though 😄 

Maybe "default uuencode encoding"? I don't really know if it's a standard thing.

Reviewer: I think `default` makes more sense than `tratitional`.

Author: I do too.  I copied it verbatim from the man page, so blame them 😆
```suggestion
- Encode a file using Base64 instead of the default uuencode encoding and and write the result to a file:
```

Reviewer: The wording as tratitional as the page itself 😆

> `uuencode -m -o {{path/to/output_file}} {{path/to/input_file}} {{output_file_name_after_decoding}}`

Reviewer: Is there a reason you don't use `--base64`? Also `-o` isn't listed in the `manned.org` page.

Author: Yes, there are two.

For one, I didn't know about it.

For two, one of the pains about Macs is that macOS _has_ to come bundled with the _most_ ancient and ritarded versions of every piece of software.  So my `uuencode` is BSD, and its manpage was last updated in 2002.  It only supports short options, so `--base64` is entirely out of the question.

I think we should move this page to `osx/`.

<details>
<summary>BSD uuencode's man page, in case you want to laugh with me</summary>

```man
UUENCODE(1)               BSD General Commands Manual              UUENCODE(1)

NAME
     uudecode, uuencode -- encode/decode a binary file

SYNOPSIS
     uuencode [-m] [-o output_file] [file] name
     uudecode [-cips] [file ...]
     uudecode [-i] -o output_file [file]

DESCRIPTION
     The uuencode and uudecode utilities are used to transmit binary files
     over transmission mediums that do not support other than simple ASCII
     data.

     The uuencode utility reads file (or by default the standard input) and
     writes an encoded version to the standard output, or output_file if one
     has been specified.  The encoding uses only printing ASCII characters and
     includes the mode of the file and the operand name for use by uudecode.

     The uudecode utility transforms uuencoded files (or by default, the stan-
     dard input) into the original form.  The resulting file is named either
     name or (depending on options passed to uudecode) output_file and will
     have the mode of the original file except that setuid and execute bits
     are not retained.  The uudecode utility ignores any leading and trailing
     lines.

     The following options are available for uuencode:

     -m     Use the Base64 method of encoding, rather than the traditional
            uuencode algorithm.

     -o output_file
            Output to output_file instead of standard output.

     The following options are available for uudecode:

     -c     Decode more than one uuencode'd file from file if possible.

     -i     Do not overwrite files.

     -o output_file
            Output to output_file instead of any pathname contained in the
            input data.

     -p     Decode file and write output to standard output.

     -s     Do not strip output pathname to base filename.  By default
            uudecode deletes any prefix ending with the last slash '/' for
            security purpose.

EXAMPLES
     The following example packages up a source tree, compresses it, uuencodes
     it and mails it to a user on another system.  When uudecode is run on the
     target system, the file ``src_tree.tar.Z'' will be created which may then
     be uncompressed and extracted into the original tree.

           tar cf - src_tree | compress |
           uuencode src_tree.tar.Z | mail sys1!sys2!user

     The following example unpack all uuencode'd files from your mailbox into
     your current working directory.

           uudecode -c < $MAIL

     The following example extract a compress'ed tar archive from your mailbox

           uudecode -o /dev/stdout < $MAIL | zcat | tar xfv -

LEGACY DESCRIPTION
     In legacy operation, uudecode masks file modes with 0666, preventing the
     creation of executable files.

     uudecode cannot change the mode of a created file which is not owned by
     the current user (unless that user is root).  In legacy operation,
     fchmod(2) allows the mode to be changed.

     For more information about legacy mode, see compat(5).

SEE ALSO
     basename(1), compress(1), mail(1), uucp(1), fchmod(2), uuencode(5)

BUGS
     Files encoded using the traditional algorithm are expanded by 35% (3
     bytes become 4, plus control information).

HISTORY
     The uudecode and uuencode utilities appeared in 4.0BSD.

BSD                            January 27, 2002                            BSD
```

</details>

Reviewer: Wow, that's really old. On Linux, I can't even download `uuencode`. It's neither in the Manjaro repos, nor in the AUR. And if it's not in the AUR, it's questionable if it even exists 😆

Author: Try installing the package `sharutil` 🤔

Reviewer: Found it. I searched for `shareutil` yesterday.
